Hosting models/render modes & What's New 8.0 (#30279)
dotnet/AspNetCore.Docs: aspnetcore/release-notes/aspnetcore-8.0.md

* [What's new in .NET 8 Preview 4](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/dotnet/asp-net-core-updates-in-dotnet-8-preview-4/)
* [What's new in .NET 8 Preview 5](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/dotnet/asp-net-core-updates-in-dotnet-8-preview-5/)
* [What's new in .NET 8 Preview 6](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/dotnet/asp-net-core-updates-in-dotnet-8-preview-6/)
* [What's new in .NET 8 Preview 7](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/dotnet/asp-net-core-updates-in-dotnet-8-preview-7/)
<!--
* [What's new in .NET 8 Release Candidate 1](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/dotnet/asp-net-core-updates-in-dotnet-8-rc-1/)
* [What's new in .NET 8 Release Candidate 2](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/dotnet/asp-net-core-updates-in-dotnet-8-rc-2/)
* [Announcing ASP.NET Core in .NET 8](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/dotnet/announcing-asp-net-core-in-dotnet-8/)
-->

[!INCLUDE [](~/includes/preview-notice.md)]

## Blazor

### Full-stack web UI

With the release of .NET 8, Blazor is a full-stack web UI framework for developing apps that render content at either the component or page level with:

> * Static server-side rendering to generate static HTML.

Reviewer: What do you think about dropping the "side" in "server-side"?

```suggestion
* Static server rendering to generate static HTML.
```

Interactive render modes also prerender content by default.

For more information, see <xref:blazor/components/render-modes?view=aspnetcore-8.0&preserve-view=true>.

### New Blazor Web App template

We've introduced a new Blazor project template: the *Blazor Web App* template. The new template provides a single starting point for using Blazor components to build any style of web UI. The template combines the strengths of the existing Blazor Server and Blazor WebAssembly hosting models with the new Blazor capabilities added in .NET 8: server-side rendering, streaming rendering, enhanced navigation and form handling, and the ability to add interactivity using either Blazor Server or Blazor WebAssembly on a per-component basis.

As part of unifying the various Blazor hosting models into a single model in .NET 8, we're also consolidating the number of Blazor project templates. We removed the Blazor Server template, and the ASP.NET Core Hosted option has been removed from the Blazor WebAssembly template. Both of these scenarios are represented by options when using the Blazor Web App template.

> [!NOTE]

> > Hosted Blazor WebAssembly remains supported in .NET 8 or later, and existing hosted Blazor WebAssembly apps can be upgraded to use .NET 8 or later API and features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Existing Blazor Server and Blazor WebAssembly apps remains supported in .NET 8. These apps can also be optionally updated to use the new full stack web UI Blazor features.
```

For more information on the new Blazor Web App template, see the following articles:

* <xref:blazor/tooling?view=aspnetcore-8.0&pivots=windows&preserve-view=true>
* <xref:blazor/project-structure?view=aspnetcore-8.0&preserve-view=true>

> ### Enhanced navigation and form handling
> 
> With new form handling features for multiple forms on a page, a request is handled by the form with the matching form handler name with per-form model binding and form validation. Also in this release, standard HTML forms based on a plain HTML `<form>` element with server-side rendering is supported without using an `EditForm`.
> 
> New antiforgery support is included in .NET 8. A new `AntiforgeryToken` component renders an antiforgery token as a hidden field, and the new `[RequireAntiforgeryToken]` attribute enables antiforgery protection. If an antiforgery check fails, a 400 (Bad Request) response is returned without form processing. The new antiforgery features are enabled by default for forms based on `Editform` and can be applied manually to standard HTML forms.
> 
> For more information, see <xref:blazor/forms-and-input-components?view=aspnetcore-8.0&preserve-view=true>.

Reviewer: This text is covering the static server rendering support for forms. Enhanced navigation and form handling is something different: it's a general enhancement to static server rendering where Blazor will intercept the browser request and do a fetch request instead. Blazor then receives the rendered response and patches it into the DOM, which avoids a page refresh and preserves more of the page state. Your app feels like it's behaving like a single-page app even though it's actually doing static server rendering.

```suggestion
### Enhanced navigation and form handling

Static server rendering typically performs a full page refresh whenever the user navigates to a new page or submits a form. In .NET 8, Blazor can enhance page navigations and form handling by intercepting the request and performing a fetch request instead. Blazor then handles the rendered response content by patching it into the browser DOM. Enhanced navigation and form handling avoids the need for a full page refresh and preserves more of the page state, so that pages load faster and more smoothly. Enhanced navigation and form handling is enabled by default for static server rendered pages when the blazor.web.js script is loaded.
```

Author: I applied this change.

I also kept what was here under a different heading, *Support for multiple forms and antiforgery*.

As part of unifying the various Blazor hosting models into a single model in .NET 8, we're also consolidating the number of Blazor project templates. We removed the Blazor Server template, and the ASP.NET Core Hosted option has been removed from the Blazor WebAssembly template. Both of these scenarios are represented by options when using the Blazor Web App template.

> [!NOTE]
> Existing Blazor Server and Blazor WebAssembly apps remain supported in .NET 8. Optionally, these apps can be  updated to use the new full-stack web UI Blazor features.

For more information on the new Blazor Web App template, see the following articles:

* <xref:blazor/tooling?view=aspnetcore-8.0&pivots=windows&preserve-view=true>
* <xref:blazor/project-structure?view=aspnetcore-8.0&preserve-view=true>

### Enhanced navigation and form handling

> Static server rendering typically performs a full page refresh whenever the user navigates to a new page or submits a form. In .NET 8, Blazor can enhance page navigation and form handling by intercepting the request and performing a fetch request instead. Blazor then handles the rendered response content by patching it into the browser DOM. Enhanced navigation and form handling avoids the need for a full page refresh and preserves more of the page state, so pages load faster and more smoothly. Enhanced navigation and form handling are enabled by default for static server rendered pages when the Blazor script (`blazor.web.js`) is loaded.

Reviewer: Turns out that for RC2 only enhanced navigation will be enabled by default. Enhanced form handling will be opt-in: https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pull/50551

```suggestion
Static server rendering typically performs a full page refresh whenever the user navigates to a new page or submits a form. In .NET 8, Blazor can enhance page navigation and form handling by intercepting the request and performing a fetch request instead. Blazor then handles the rendered response content by patching it into the browser DOM. Enhanced navigation and form handling avoids the need for a full page refresh and preserves more of the page state, so pages load faster and more smoothly. Enhance navigation is enabled by default when the Blazor script (`blazor.web.js`) is loaded. Enhanced form handling can be optional enabled for specific forms.
```

Author: I'm now tracking enhanced form handling for RC2 in the .NET 8 tracking issue.

> ### Support for multiple forms and antiforgery

Reviewer: I think this section on handling traditional forms should go before the enhanced navigation and form handling section.

With new form handling features for multiple forms on a page, a request is handled by the form with the matching form handler name with per-form model binding and form validation. Also in this release, standard HTML forms based on a plain HTML `<form>` element with server-side rendering is supported without using an `EditForm`.

New antiforgery support is included in .NET 8. A new `AntiforgeryToken` component renders an antiforgery token as a hidden field, and the new `[RequireAntiforgeryToken]` attribute enables antiforgery protection. If an antiforgery check fails, a 400 (Bad Request) response is returned without form processing. The new antiforgery features are enabled by default for forms based on `Editform` and can be applied manually to standard HTML forms.

For more information, see <xref:blazor/forms-and-input-components?view=aspnetcore-8.0&preserve-view=true>.

### Streaming rendering

> You can now stream content updates on the response stream when using server-side rendering with Blazor. Streaming rendering can improve the user experience for pages that perform long-running asynchronous tasks in order to fully render.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can now stream content updates on the response stream when using static server rendering with Blazor. Streaming rendering can improve the user experience for pages that perform long-running asynchronous tasks in order to fully render by rendering content as soon as it's available.
```

For example, to render a page you might need to make a long running database query or an API call. Normally, asynchronous tasks executed as part of rendering a page must complete before the rendered response is sent, which can delay loading the page. Streaming rendering initially renders the entire page with placeholder content while asynchronous operations execute. After the asynchronous operations are complete, the updated content is sent to the client on the same response connection and patched by into the DOM. The benefit of this approach is that the main layout of the app renders as quickly as possible and the page is updated as soon as the content is ready.

For more information, see <xref:blazor/components/rendering?view=aspnetcore-8.0&preserve-view=true#streaming-rendering>.

<!-- UPDATE 8.0

RC2

### Blazor interactive server rendering APIs for accessing `HttpContext`

Issue: https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/issues/48769
PR: https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/pull/50253

-->

### Render Razor components outside of ASP.NET Core

> A convenient side-effect of the work to enable server-side rendering is that you can now render Razor components outside the context of an HTTP request. You can render Razor components as HTML directly to a string or stream independently of the ASP.NET Core hosting environment. This is convenient for scenarios where you want to generate HTML fragments, such as for a generating email or static site content.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can now render Razor components outside the context of an HTTP request. You can render Razor components as HTML directly to a string or stream independently of the ASP.NET Core hosting environment. This is convenient for scenarios where you want to generate HTML fragments, such as for a generating email or static site content.
```

For more information, see <xref:blazor/components/quickgrid?view=aspnetcore-8.0&preserve-view=true>.

### Route to named elements

Blazor now supports using client-side routing to navigate to a specific HTML element on a page using standard URL fragments. If you specify an identifier for an HTML element using the standard `id` attribute, Blazor correctly scrolls to that element when the URL fragment matches the element identifier.

For more information, see <xref:blazor/fundamentals/routing?view=aspnetcore-8.0&preserve-view=true#hashed-routing-to-named-elements>.

### Root-level cascading values

Root-level cascading values can be registered for the entire component hierarchy. Named cascading values and subscriptions for update notifications are supported.

For more information, see <xref:blazor/components/cascading-values-and-parameters?view=aspnetcore-8.0&preserve-view=true#root-level-cascading-values>.

### Virtualize empty content

> Use the new `EmptyContent` parameter to supply content when the component has loaded and either `Items` is empty or `ItemsProviderResult<T>.TotalItemCount` is zero.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the new `EmptyContent` parameter on the Virtualize component to supply content when the component has loaded and either `Items` is empty or `ItemsProviderResult<T>.TotalItemCount` is zero.
```

For more information, see <xref:blazor/components/virtualization?view=aspnetcore-8.0&preserve-view=true#empty-content>.

### Monitor SignalR circuit activity

You can now monitor inbound circuit activity in server-side apps using the new `CreateInboundActivityHandler` method on `CircuitHandler`. Inbound circuit activity is any activity sent from the browser to the server, such as UI events or JavaScript-to-.NET interop calls.

For more information, see <xref:blazor/fundamentals/signalr?view=aspnetcore-8.0&preserve-view=true#monitor-server-side-circuit-activity>.

### Faster runtime performance with the Jiterpreter

> The *Jiterpreter* is a new runtime feature in .NET 8 that enables partial Just-in-Time (JIT) support in the .NET Intermediate Language (IL) interpreter to achieve improved runtime performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The *Jiterpreter* is a new runtime feature in .NET 8 that enables partial Just-in-Time (JIT) compilation support when running on WebAssembly to achieve improved runtime performance.
```

> For more information, see the following:
> 
> * [Improved Blazor WebAssembly performance with the Jiterpreter (.NET Blog)](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/dotnet/asp-net-core-updates-in-dotnet-8-preview-2/#improved-blazor-webassembly-performance-with-the-jiterpreter)
> * <xref:blazor/host-and-deploy/webassembly?view=aspnetcore-8.0&preserve-view=true#ahead-of-time-aot-compilation>
> 

Reviewer: The blog post data on the Jiterpreter is already pretty stale.

```suggestion
For more information, see the following:

* <xref:blazor/host-and-deploy/webassembly?view=aspnetcore-8.0&preserve-view=true#ahead-of-time-aot-compilation>

```

### Ahead-of-time (AOT) SIMD and exception handling

> WebAssembly Single Instruction, Multiple Data (SIMD) can improve the throughput of vectorized computations by performing an operation on multiple pieces of data in parallel using a single instruction. SIMD is enabled by default for all major browsers.
> 
> New AOT exception handling is also enabled by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Blazor WebAssembly ahead-of-time (AOT) compilation now uses [WebAssembly Fixed-width SIMD](https://github.com/WebAssembly/simd/blob/master/proposals/simd/SIMD.md) and [WebAssembly Exception handling](https://github.com/WebAssembly/exception-handling/blob/master/proposals/exception-handling/Exceptions.md) by default to improve runtime performance.
```

For more information, see the following:

[AOT: Single Instruction, Multiple Data (SIMD)](xref:blazor/tooling?view=aspnetcore-8.0&pivots=windows&preserve-view=true#single-instruction-multiple-data-simd)

> [AOT: Exception handling](<xref:blazor/tooling?view=aspnetcore-8.0&pivots=windows&preserve-view=true#exception-handling)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[AOT: Exception handling](xref:blazor/tooling?view=aspnetcore-8.0&pivots=windows&preserve-view=true#exception-handling)
```

### Web-friendly Webcil packaging

Webcil is web-friendly packaging of .NET assemblies that removes content specific to native Windows execution to avoid issues when deploying to environments that block the download or use of `.dll` files. Webcil is enabled by default for Blazor WebAssembly apps.

For more information, see <xref:blazor/host-and-deploy/webassembly?view=aspnetcore-8.0&preserve-view=true#webcil-packaging-format-for-net-assemblies>.

> ### Blazor WebAssembly debugging

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Blazor WebAssembly debugging improvements
```
